
## 4.1 - Introduction

In addition to riluzole, the results of the screen performed by Biechele and Camp that was performed at the Broad Institute (discussed in chapter 2) indicated that multiple compounds from the drug class statins are Wnt enhancers. Statins are known to inhibit the metabolic enzyme HMGCR, which is involved in cholesterol synthesis. Statins are typically prescribed to patients for prevention and treatment of hyperlipidemia and other cholesterol disorders [@Reiner_2013].

During my work performing secondary validation on many of the hits from the screen, I saw that statins indeed exhibited a robust enhancement of the Wnt/ß-Catenin pathway. I was intrigued by this finding based on the  amount of pre-existing knowledge of these drugs' mechanism of action, and because statins are among the most commonly prescribed medications in the United States.

I tested to see whether the effect was consistent across mutliple statins, and affirmed Wnt/ß-Catenin pathway enhancement with three different structures: lovastatin, mevastatin, and simvastatin. I performed experiments with statins in a number of biological contexts in which the Moon lab was interested in finding pharmacologic enhancers of Wnt. I saw that the effect of statin on Wnt held for melanoma cells, hESCs, and neural derived cells using the pBAR reporter. (See Appendix B)

Ultimately, in order to proceed ahead with my investigation into the biological implications of this connection between statins and the Wnt pathway I chose to focus on the neural context. Simvastatin had previously been investigated for potential effects in the CNS that were independent of inhibition of cholesterol synthesis. A body of evidence existed suggesting that statins both enhance neurogenesis, and have therapeutic potential for neurological disorders (discussed in the introduction section of the article in this chapter). I aimed my investigation towards answering the question of whether enhancement of Wnt/ß-Catenin signaling by simvastatin could explain these phenomena.