
## 4.3 - Conclusion

This study, investigating whether simvastatin can enhance Wnt/ß-catenin signaling in the adult brain, is another example implementation of the research pattern that I have outlined throughout this thesis. I surfaced statins as an interesting hit from a primary screen, took the compounds through secondary validation, and investigated the biological effect in an in vivo model. Finally, I was able to make inroads to learning the mechanism of how statin inhibition of HMGCR connects to Wnt signaling.

Prior to conducting the in vivo experiments presented in this paper, I was most interested to see whether simvastatin could rescue deleterious phenotypes in a model of neurological disease. I sought advice on this subject from a former Moon lab member, Bryan White, and a collaborator of the lab, Phillip Horner, who had undertaken an investigation of Wnt signaling in TBI [@White_2010]. I was informed of the within-group noise in the experimental results that White acquired, which was attributed to the inconsist response between animals in this injury model. A power analysis using White's variability numbers revealed that if I were to conduct a 4 group study testing each combination of simvastatin, injury, and controls, I would need a prohibitively large number of mice in order to reach statistical significance. Therefore, in order to stay within the scope of time, cost, and my own capabilities as a graduate student, I conducted the study with healthy adult mice as opposed to a disease model.

In the submission process for this article, I fielded complaints from reviewers that my findings were incremental. This was based in the fact that I was trying to tie together two different ideas, each which were somewhat novel but not entirely new. My work showed for the first time what simvastatin enhances Wnt signaling in vivo, and I demonstrated a biological effect of this enhancement on neurogenesis. However it had previously been demonstrated in cell culture models that simvastatin enhances Wnt signaling. Also, a number of papers had shown neurological effects of statins. I believe, however, that the findings of my paper were significant and contributed important new knowledge to the field for the following reasons. Meta analyses such as the 2012 paper continue to show that patients who take statins are less likely to develop dementia. As we do not possess a clear understanding yet of the mechanisms that are responsible, there remains a demand for further investigation.
