<!-- What is the Problem -->
The flow of information through cell signaling pathways is central to an organism's livelyhood. A disruption in cell signaling, caused by a gene mutation or environmental factor, influences cell behavior in a way that can precipitate diseases like cancer and neurodegenertion. It stands to reason that if we can monitor and influence signaling events with sufficient resolution, we will be able to revert cells back to a healthy state and even regenerate damaged tissues. Significant technical advances over the last decade in our ability to monitor and control cell state has yielded speculation of a coming wave of rational and targetted therapies. However, the landscape of therapeutics in use today is populated overwhelmingly by classes of molecules that long pre-date the modern era of genomics and proteomics focused research.

<!-- Why is the problem hard? -->
Numerous bottlenecks have been encountered by groups conducting omics-scale projects aimed at generating novel therapies. As sub-fields have developed quickly, there is a fragmentation effect when moving between domains. Further, the volume of data produced by automated techniques requires researchers to utilize methods for filtering and sorting results in aggregate. This at times seems counter to the wisdom of traditional candidate based approaches that are driven by personal knowledge of primary literature. 

<!-- What is your approach/result to solving this problem? -->
 In order to accomplish this goal, we must posess both a thorough understanding of endogenous cell signaling pathways, and a practical toolkit for performing therapeutic intervention.

 While there remain many significant hurdles before our complete comprehension and control of cell signaling, some of the more tackle-able ones seem to be:

1. The massive diversity in signaling molecules present in cells causes a 'needle in the haystack' problem for finding those responsible for a particular mechanism.
2. The intertwined nature of signaling pathways impedes our ability to study a single pathway in isolation.
3. Difficulty translating between domains

I used automated and high throughput techniques for discovery. This allowed me to cover the vast search-space of signaling molecules. I combined orthogonal measurements, eg multiple signaling reporters, to 

I took the leads that were generated by high-throughput, and tested for efficacy in disease relevent contexts.

<!-- What is the consequence of your approach? -->
As a result of this research we were able to repurpose mutliple FDA approved drugs as Wnt enhancers.