The Wnt/ß-Catenin signaling pathway is a key regulator of proliferation, differentation, and programmed cell death in stem and progenitor cells. Misregulatation of the Wnt pathway or other signaling events that control these behaviors can precipitate diseases like cancer and neurodegenertion.  It stands to reason that if we can monitor and influence Wnt/ß-Catenin signaling in stem and progenitor cells with sufficient resolution, we will be able to translate this knowledge into rationally designed therapies.

Thanks in part to technical advances, as well as a concerted focus on studying biology at the level of signaling pathways, the field of life sciences has made major headway towards development of therapies that utilize pharmacologic manipulation of stem and progenitor cells. We know in large part where stem and progenitor cell niches reside in the adult body and have identified many instances of how these populations of cells contribute to homeostasis or disease depending on their environment. We've identified key markers that can be used to determine the relative pleuripotency of a cell, and to identify its specified lineage following differentiation. We possess an increasingly rich understanding of how stem cells may manipulated to yield a chosen lineage, and conversely how to induce pleuripotency in differentiated cells. However, a telling sign that we have not yet realized the aforementioned goal is that the landscape of therapeutics in clinical use today is populated overwhelmingly by classes of molecules that long pre-date the modern era of genomics and proteomics.

My contribution of original knowledge in this area is the discovery of various molecules that can be used to manipulate Wnt/ß-Catenin signaling. This includes repurposed clinically-approved compounds that were not previously known to affect Wnt, and novel compounds whose biological mechanisms were later determined. In efforts to drive discovery, I tested and honed a set of methodologies that can be used to perform automated and high-throughput experiments in stem and progenitor cells. To direct discovery towards clinical relevance, I designed and iterated upon a pipeline to perform primary data filtering, secondary validation, and ultimately to test discoveries in clinically revelant disease models.
