
# 1 - Introduction

## 1.1 - Background

### 1.1.1 - Stem Cell Signaling and Disease

Stem cells are cells that divide both symmetrically and asymmetrically. This means that populations of stem cells hold the capabilities for self renewal, as well as production of  differentiated cell types of various lineages [@Basics_2009]. Human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) reside within developing human embryos and are pluripotent. This means that hESCs can differentiate into any of three germ layers, and ultimately are capable of yielding any of the cell types found in the body. In addition to embryonic stem cells, there are stem cells that reside in certain tissues during adulthood. These cells may be lineage restricted (multipotent), as opposed to pluripotent. Adult stem cells are also called somatic stem cells, and there are specific populations that are referred to as progenitor cells [@Young_2004]. Adult stem cells are responsible for maintaining homeostasis in tissues. This is especially the case in areas with rapid cell turnover such as bone, hematopoietic tissue, hair follicles, and intestinal crypts [@Potten_1998 @Morris_2004].

Stem cell populations in both developing and adult organisms are sometimes found within specialized subcompartments called niches [@Scadden_2006]. Stem cell niches house stem cells as well as supporting cells. Supporting cells within niches are responsible for providing nutrients to stem cells, and also can provide signals that guide stem cell behaviors. Among these behaviors are proliferation, induction of differentiation, and lineage specification. At any given time, the mixture of signaling molecules present in the microenvironment of the niche guides stem cell behavior and affects the identity and rate of new cell formation [@Morrison_2008].

Although we possess only a partial understanding of how these signals are integrated to regulate key behaviors in stem cells, it is clear that when signaling becomes misregulated there are often deleterious effects. Alterations in proliferation and differentiation that are caused by genetic or environmental factors contribute to the pathology of a number of diseases. In cases where a cell type that is necessary for maintaining healthy tissue is no longer produced, tissue degeneration can occur. Alternatively, stem cell proliferation gone unchecked may spur tumorigenesis. A subfield of cancer biology has formed to investigate the hypothesis of cancer stem cells [@Reya_2001]. This hypothesis holds that there are stem cells within a tumor that possess indefinite potential for self-renewal, and that the same pathways regulating self-renewal in normal stem cells have similar roles in cancer stem cells. 

Given the importance of signaling molecules in guiding stem cells towards either healthy or disease phenotypes, a major goal of current research is to better understand the signals that influence stem cell decisions. This may aid in the development of novel therapies for these diseases. Moreover, if we possess pharmacological tools to direct stem cell behavior it may be possible to repair diseased tissue using cells derived from the patient or a donor.

### 1.1.2 - Wnt/ß-Catenin Signaling in Stem Cells

Wnts are a family of secreted glycoproteins that act as ligands for Fzd transmembrane receptors [@Clevers2006469]. Wnts were first discovered for their ability to regulate cell polarity in Drosophila and to induce body axes in Xenopus during development [@Chien_2009_Rev]. Wnt/ß-catenin signaling, which is referred to as canonical Wnt signaling, involves the accumulation of ß-catenin protein in the cytosol following membrane receptor activation by canonical Wnt ligands. ß-catenin is then translocated to the nucleus where it binds a set of transcription factors, ultimately driving expression of various target genes. [@Angers_2009] In contrast, ß-catenin independent, or non-canonical, Wnt signaling is thought not to direct gene expression.[^WntNote] In the ensuing decades since the discovery of this signaling pathway, Wnt has been determined to play a central part in most aspects of embryonic development as well as in the homeostasis of adult tissues. 

[^WntNote]: The main focus of this thesis is on Wnt/ß-Catenin signaling, and unless otherwise noted 'Wnt/ß-Catenin' may heretofore be used interchangeably with 'Wnt' within this text.

### 1.1.3 - Wnt in Cancer Tumorigenesis

Misregulation of the Wnt pathway has been linked to the formation of different types of tumors. A well studied example of this is in colorectal cancer, where mutations in the gene _APC_ are the most frequent cause [@Clevers_1997]. APC is one of the proteins responsible for degrading ß-Catenin when the pathway is not active. When APC cannot function there is an abnormally high level of Wnt signaling that causes overexpression of growth promoting genes [@Najdi_2011]. Mutations in other core Wnt pathway genes _AXIN1_, _CTNNB1_, and _TCF7L2_ have been linked to tumor formation [@Anastas_2013]. Aberrations in Wnt signaling have been identified as contributing to pancreatic, mammary, ovarian, and skin cancers.

In melanoma, as opposed to colorectal cancer, a high level of Wnt signaling was found to correlate with improved patient survival [@chien2009activated]. Melanoma tumors are commonly caused by mutations in the ERK signaling pathway, the most frequently observed being BRAF V600E mutation. It was discovered that Wnt has a high level of crosstalk with hyperactivated ERK signaling in melanoma cells [@biechele2012wnt]. It should also be noted that a high level of Wnt/ß catenin signaling has been found to induce tumorigenesis and metastasis in melanomas dependent on mutational status [@Delmas_2007 @Damsky_2011].

A more in depth explanation of Wnt in melanoma is included in chapter 2 of this thesis.

### 1.1.4 - Wnt in cultured hESCs

Wnt governs the transition between self renewal and spontaneous differentiation in hESCs. It was initially reported that active endogenous Wnt signaling is necessary for embryonic stem cells to maintain an undifferentiated state [@Sato_2004]. However, this finding was later determined to be specific to culture conditions used in the study. Endogenous Wnt signaling has since been shown to be dispensable for self-renewal, while activation of the pathway with exogenous Wnt lead cells to undergo spontaneous differentiation [@davidson2012wnt]. The conflicted nature of these findings speaks to the complexity of hESC culture, where multiple signaling pathways are highly dependant upon one another. It has been suggested that the investigation of novel small molecule inhibitors of Wnt/ß-Catenin signaling may help to resolve this [@Nat_2012].

Efforts to control when and how hESCs differentiate in culture are central to a number of novel therapeutic strategies. The development of protocols for directed hESC differentiation is an active area of research. Directed differentiation protocols utilizing manipulation of the Wnt pathway in order to produce myocardial cells [@Paige_2010], neuronal cells [@Dhara_2008], and retinal pigment epithelium cells [@Li_2009]. These protocols require both the knowledge of how Wnt controls differentiation, and tools that can be used to specifically regulate the pathway. 

The effects of Wnt signaling un hESC differentiation are discussed in chapter 3 of this thesis.

### 1.1.5 - Wnt in Adult Neurogenesis

Until the 1990s, it was not widely accepted that cells continue to divide throughout adulthood in mammalian brains. This changed when number of studies using cell cycle markers identified dividing progenitor populations that reside in the certain brain regions and generate new functioning neurons in various animal models [@Gage_2002]. As with other adult stem cell populations, depletion or damage to adult neural progenitor cells (aNPCs) was found to contribute to disease. For example, following traumatic brain injury, a drop in aNPC population is linked with outcomes like post traumatic stress disorder and memory loss. Genetic factors that negatively affect adult neurogenesis contribute to the etiology of various CNS disorders, including Alzheimer’s and Schizophrenia [@Reif_2006 @Brinton_2006]. 

The Wnt/ß-catenin pathway is a key regulator of adult hippocampal neurogenesis [@Lie_2005]. Enhanced Wnt/ß-catenin signaling is sufficient to increase production of neurons from aNPCS.  Moreover, Hippocampal neurogenesis is blocked in adult rats by a dominant-negative WNT, which leads to deficits in spatial and object recognition memory. [@Jessberger_2009] In the normal aging process, secretion negative regulators of Wnt signaling was found to increase throughout the lifespan, and this correlates with a reduction in neurogenesis [@Seib_2013 @Jang_2013].

A more detailed account of Wnt in adult neurogenesis is presented in chapter 4 of this thesis.

### 1.1.6 - Pharmacologic regulators of Wnt/ß-Catenin signaling

In spite of the fact that misregulation of the Wnt pathway has a well known role in cancer and degenerative diseases, there currently are no clinically approved therapies that specifically target Wnt signaling [@zimmerman2012targeting]. However, promisingly there are a handful of such compounds currently undergoing clinical trials [@Hitt_2013].

There are numerous difficulties that have stood in the way of progress towards developing Wnt targeted drugs. For one, progenitor cell populations like in the intestine and in germinal regions of the brain require Wnt signaling, so inhibiting the pathway in order to block the growth of a tumor with activated Wnt can be too harmful to other tissues for clinical feasibility [@Watanabe_Dai_2011]. Another problem is the interconnectedness of Wnt pathway components with other signaling pathways. For example GSK3, which is a kinase and thus relatively easier to target with small molecules, is also integral to AKT signaling and performs an additional role in synthesizing glycogen [@TakahashiYanaga2013191].

Chapters 2 - 4 of this manuscript each discuss pharmacologic regulators of the Wnt pathway.

## 1.2 Approach

### 1.2.1 Discovering Small Molecule Regulators of Wnt/ß-Catenin Signaling

In the research presented in chapters 2-4, I looked to discover small molecule regulators of the Wnt/ß-catenin pathway. I was particularly interested in small molecules because of their applicability to both basic research and clinical drug development. As opposed to genetic approaches such as siRNAs and shRNAs to induce a gain or loss of function in cell signaling, small molecules can be included in an experimental paradigm with relatively little overhead and higher relative predictability of effect [@Weiss_2007]. This result carries over when administering small molecules to animals, which tends to be more efficacious than genetic materials. Although the delivery of RNAi molecules in vivo is possible, studies employing this method have relied upon sophisticated techniques and instrumentation [@Beronja_2010]. Finally, small molecules have a long proven track record in treating human diseases.

Consistent with my overall goals, small molecules are highly amenable to discovery via automation. The use of arrayed libraries in microplates allows for high-throughput screens to be performed by automated equipment, rather than being tested individually by hand [@Sundberg_2000]. These contents of the libraries can be produced from curated lists, such as the library of human experienced compounds in the riluzole and simvastatin papers. Libraries can also be produced combinatorially around a scaffold or particular pharmacophore [@Thompson_1996].

Another reason that I prioritized the discovery of small molecule regulators of Wnt/ß-Catenin signaling is that the small molecules that I reported on serve as deliverables in and of themselves alongside the journal articles. This means that future projects have a reliable physical starting place from which to conduct experiments. The molecules discussed in these works are commercially available, and in some cases are already approved for human use. This means that the time it takes for another group to begin experiments based off of my findings will be minimized, and ongoing studies of these molecules such as in clinical trials will be able to draw inference from my projects.

### 1.2.2 Understanding Biological Mechanisms through Cell Signaling Events

The projects in which  I participated attempt to further our understanding of the mechanisms of cell signaling. In each case, I used Wnt/ß-Catenin signaling as an entry point from which to address biological mechanisms that govern behavior. This entailed selectively monitoring and perturbing Wnt signaling. In order to monitor the pathway I made use of genetic reporter constructs whose expression are driven by nuclear ß-Catenin, including pBAR in cultured cells [@Biechele_2008] and BAT-GAL in mice [@Maretto_2003]. To determine the role of Wnt in homeostatic and disease processes, I perturbed Wnt signaling while monitoring behaviors such as cell death, proliferation, induction of differentiation, and lineage specification.

 The lack of Wnt pathway directed drugs can be blamed, in part, on the need for more feasible drug targets. To find more targets, we should focus on discovering additional protein regulators of the pathway. To this end, I monitored Wnt signaling while using established methods to perturb other pathways, in order to find where multiple pathways may cross-talk with one another. In screening small molecules, we sought to discover novel drug targets. In the work presented in chapters 2 and 4, we attempted to map the previously unknown connections between drug targets HMGCR and GRM1, and the Wnt signaling pathway. In chapter 3 of this thesis, we determined that the molecule under investigation acted through a recently discovered mechanism of Wnt inhibition.

### 1.2.3 Exploiting Cell Signaling to Inform Novel Therapeutics

As a natural complement to learning about the role of Wnt/ß-Catenin signaling in disease and discovery of small molecules, an aim of my work was to gather pieces of pre-clinical evidence. This meant identifying opportunities where perturbation of Wnt signaling in stem and progenitor cells may help to inform the development of rational therapeutics. 

An example of this in my work is in the context of metastatic melanoma. Until the FDA approval of the mutant BRAF inhibitor vemurafenib in 2011, this disease had no effective drug treatment. We investigated the possibility that small molecules that regulate Wnt signaling could be efficacious in this disease. Ultimately this helped to developed new inroads for the development of melanoma therapies. Our investigation of Wnt in this context was able to help explain how mutant BRAF contributes to disease pathology, and has provided clues as to how some patients' resistance to vemurafenib may be overcome [@biechele2012wnt].

Another example of this approach is to attempt to repurpose drugs that had already passed through human safety studies. This has been widely discussed as a strategy that may successfully speed up development of therapies, and the NIH has promoted this approach in collaboration with pharmaceutical companies [@Huang 2011]. Chapters 2 and 4 of this thesis present investigation of previously undocumented effects FDA approved compounds.
