
# 5 - Conclusion

## 5.1 - Summary of Results

The journal articles covered in this thesis are connected in their approach and goals. Projects began with a high-throughput screen to discover molecules that regulate Wnt/ß-catenin signaling in decidedly interesting contexts. The molecules with the greatest activity in the screen were chosen as hits, and were fed into a pipeline of filtering and validation steps. Finally, the activity of the most promising molecules was characterized in a series of cell culture, animal, and disease models. From project to project, this was pattern iteratively improved upon. I looked to maximize the amount of usable information gathered, and to optimize relevance to disease using experimental models.

My contribution of original knowledge in the field of translational stem cell biology is the discovery of various molecules that can be used to manipulate Wnt/ß-Catenin signaling. This includes repurposed clinically-approved compounds that were not previously known to affect Wnt, and novel compounds whose biological mechanisms were later determined. In addition, I developed methods that can be used for conducting large scale screens and for performing automated experiments with stem and progenitor cells.

## 5.2 - Successes of my Approach

The central theme of the Moon Lab is Wnt signaling. This influenced the direction of my research, such as in deciding which primary screen hits I deemed most interesting to follow, and which types of libraries to screen. I found that, throughout the course of my research, there was a significant benefit to my progress by focusing specifically on Wnt signaling. There was a synergistic effect of having a well curated set of reagents and a wealth of human expertise on the subject of Wnt signaling in house. Notably, I was able to use the BAR construct as a first line of discovery in a diverse set of contexts. 

The focus on discovery of small molecules means that alongside each publication presented in this thesis there is a tangible molecular entity. The small molecules that we reported on reliably elicit an effect, are widely available and are relatively inexpensive. In the case of WIKI4, where we identified a Wnt inhibitor from among a large set of novel compounds, this molecule is now commercially available alongside other Wnt inhibitors [@Tocris_Wiki4]. As such, researchers looking to reproduce or build upon our findings will not have to rely upon proprietary formulations or methodologies. Further, clinicians investigating the therapeutic effects of riluzole or simvastatin may be able to contextualize their own findings with the biological mechanisms that we reported. These, in sum, bolster the impact of the projects that I worked on.

## 5.3  - Shortcomings of my Approach

Aside from the benefits discussed above, choosing to investigate biological mechanisms and disease through the lens of a single signaling pathway imposes some difficulties in research. It is common that mechanisms contributing to the pathology of a disease span indiscriminately across signaling pathways. We found this to be the case in our investigation of melanoma, presented in chapter 2 of this thesis and in follow up studies, where ERK signaling and Wnt signaling both play crucial roles in cell proliferation and survival [@biechele2012wnt]. A major facet of cancer is its ability to adapt to unfavorable environments, and thus it is not surprising that tumors frequently develop insensitivity to drugs targeting specific pathways [@Hutchinson_2014].

In contrast to the positive aspects of prioritizing discovery of small molecules, I found that this restricted the number possible solutions that could be utilized to solve the problems that I faced in my research. In trying to determine the mechanisms connecting the targets of riluzole and simvastatin with the Wnt pathway, I came up short. With Riluzole, we found convincing evidence that its effect on Wnt was due to inhibition of metabotropic glutamate receptors, but we could not fully resolve this using other known small molecule inhibitors of the pathway. In our investigation of Wiki4 presented in chapter 3 of this thesis, we identified the mechanism in large part because a molecule with a similar mechanism of Tankyrase inhibition had recently been reported [@Huang_2009]. In the case of the simvastatin, I was able to confirm that the effect on Wnt was due to inhibition of its known target HMGCR, but when I attempted to trace the steps back to Wnt signaling I could not successfully connect the dots with small molecules alone.

As is discussed throughout this thesis, I relied heavily on HTS as an initial discovery step in my inquiries. I found throughout the course of my studies that there is a finite limit to the utility of this method, and that there are certain downsides that apply to the use of this method in an academic settings. The nature of secondary followup of high throughput screens involves repetitive work that is absent forward movement or intellectual consideration of results. This is not a problem in a commercial setting, but in an academic lab this often runs counter to the aspirations of the person conducting experiments. Graduate students and post-docs seek to learn the skills of how to best ask questions based on careful interpretation of result, and how to formulate methods to inquire and answer those questions. Manually grinding through lists of results in order to move to the next step in a research project does not work these muscles.

Finally, in cases where a single experiment represents a significant portion of lab resources, the challenges of resource management are amplified. The chapters in this thesis demonstrate that just as a single screen can spawn multiple projects leading to publications, it can also happen that multiple screens lead to projects yielding zero publications. 

## 5.4 - Suggestions for Future Work

### 5.4.1 - Automate Wherever Possible

Although I've outlined above some of the potential pitfalls in relying on large screening campaigns, automation is heavily under-utilized in academic labs. While our understanding of complex biological mechanisms has grown massively in scale over the past decade, the tools that we use to make discoveries on a day to day basis have in large part remained constant. Hand pipetting, non-miniaturized assays, and manual data entry remain commonplace. These represent missed opportunities for cost and time savings.

This recommendation does not imply that graduate students and post-docs should be expected exert any less effort, or that we should rely on machines to do the work of scientific discovery in place of human intellect. Rather, it is an acknowledgement that the time biologists spend on work is most effective when focused on the tasks of interpreting data, followed thorough consideration and planning of future experiments based upon the interpretation. The equipment to perform automated experiments will continue to become less expensive to own and operate, either by individual labs or institutional core facilities. Thus, I recommend that we should expedite its adoption.

### 5.4.2 - Expand Beyond the Pathway Paradigm

The work that I undertook was largely through the lens of Wnt/ß-catenin and other signaling pathways. The consideration of cell signaling pathways has aided in developing targeted therapies, and has drastically widened our understanding of cell function. However, in this chapter I have pointed out cases where the emphasis on studying cells at the level of the pathway can become a self-imposed restriction. Notably, cancer research has revealed that the folly in the expectation that chemical inhibition of a single pathway will can eradicate a tumor. Moreso, the complex mixture of molecules that govern hESCs and aNPCs highlights the nonlinearity of signaling events.

The solution, then, is to view cell signaling as an interconnected network rather than a series of pathways. The term 'cross talk' refers to  between multiple cell signaling pathways. Based upon the above observations, this interconnectedness should be considered the norm rather than the exception. The most important implication of widening the scope of cell signaling research to de-emphasizing the individual pathway is that we may avoid biases that have stood in the way of discovering effective therapies.

### 5.4.3 - A new framework for collaboration 

The adoption of these new paradigms in biology research require us to rethink the way that collaborations are formed, carried out, and reported on. We must properly embrace the trend of large cross-disciplinary experiments, and come up with a way to distribute credit fairly to those involved in order to better incentivise experts to work with one another. Academic labs would benefit from the ability to quickly share assays, protocol, and libraries. This removes the need for us to re-invent the wheel, so that we can focus on particular area of expertise.

At present, it is too difficult for researchers on the forefront of disease biology to connect with researchers possessing the technical skills involved in automation. The current journal publication and authorship model does not offer the correct set of incentives for these wide collaborations. It takes a long time to publish a paper, letting a large dataset sit in isolation while a single finding is followed up in detail over the course of years is a bad use of resources. We should put incentives in place to share large datasets rapidly, rather than to keep them hidden.


